.TH RUBBER-INFO 1
.SH NAME
rubber-info \- extract information from LaTeX documents

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rubber-info
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ action ]
.I source

.SH DESCRIPTION
Rubber-info is a utility for extracting various kinds of information from a
LaTeX document. Information can be extracted from the source (for instance
when calculating dependencies) or from the compilation log files (to extract
errors and warnings). This program is a complement for the compilation system
.BR rubber (1).

.SH ACTIONS
One of the following command-line options must be specified, to decide which
information to extract. Of course, for actions that read a log file, a
compilation must have been done before. If none of these actions is specified,
.I --check
is assumed.
.TP
.B --boxes
Extracts from the log file the places in the source where bad boxes appeared
(these are the famous overfull and underfull \\hbox and \\vbox)
.TP
.B --check
Report errors if there are any, otherwise report undefined references if there
are any, otherwise list warnings and bad boxes. This is the default action.
.TP
.B --deps
Analyse the source files and produce a space-separated list of all the files
that the document depends on and that Rubber cannot rebuild.
.TP
.B --errors
Extract from the log file the list of errors that occured during the last
compilation.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Display the list of all available options and exit nicely.
.TP
.B --refs
Show a list of undefined references (i.e. the \\ref's that are not defined by
any \\label).
.TP
.B --version
Print the version number and exit nicely.
.TP
.B --warnings
Stupidly enumerate all LaTeX warnings, i.e. all the lines in the log file that
contain the string "Warning".
.PP

.SH OPTIONS
The following options may be specified:
.TP
.BI -m,\ --module \ <module> [: <args> ]
Use the specified module in addition to the document's packages. Arguments
can be passed to the package by adding them after a colon, they correspond to
the package options in LaTeX. See the manpage of
.BR rubber (1)
for the list of standard modules.
.TP
.B -s, --short
Display LaTeX's error messages in a compact form (one error per line).
.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Increase the verbosity level. The default level is 0, levels up to 3 exist.
.PP

.SH BUGS
There are surely a some...

This page documents Rubber version 0.99.6. The program and this man-page are
maintained by Emmanuel Beffara <manu at beffara dot org>.
The homepage for Rubber can be found at http://beffara.org/stuff/rubber.html.

.SH SEE ALSO

.BR rubber (1),
.BR latex (1)
