.TH RUBBER-INFO 1
.SH NAME
rubber-info \- extract information from LaTeX documents

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rubber-info
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ action ]
.I source

.SH DESCRIPTION
Rubber-info is a utility for extracting various kinds of information from a
LaTeX document. Information can be extracted from the source (for instance
when calculating dependencies) or from the compilation log files (to extract
errors and warnings). This program is a complement for the compilation system
.BR rubber (1).

The command-line options are those used by
.BR rubber (1)
plus one of the actions described below.

.SH ACTIONS
One of the following command-line options must be specified, to decide which
information to extract. Of course, for actions that read a log file, a
compilation must have been done before. If none of these actions is specified,
.I \-\-check
is assumed.
.TP
.B \-\-boxes
Extracts from the log file the places in the source where bad boxes appeared
(these are the famous overfull and underfull \\hbox and \\vbox)
.TP
.B \-\-check
Report errors if there are any, otherwise report undefined references if there
are any, otherwise list warnings and bad boxes. This is the default action.
.TP
.B \-\-deps
Analyse the source files and produce a space-separated list of all the files
that the document depends on and that Rubber cannot rebuild.
.TP
.B \-\-errors
Extract from the log file the list of errors that occured during the last
compilation.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display the list of all available options and exit nicely.
.TP
.B \-\-refs
Report the list of undefined or multiply defined references (i.e. the \\ref's
that are not defined by one \\label).
.TP
.B \-\-rules
Analyse the source files and produce a list of dependency rules. One rule is
produced for each intermediate target that would be made when running
.BR rubber .
Rules are formatted in the style of Makefiles.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version number and exit nicely.
.TP
.B \-\-warnings
Stupidly enumerate all LaTeX warnings, i.e. all the lines in the log file that
contain the string "Warning".
.PP

.SH BUGS
There are surely a some...

This page documents Rubber version 1.1. The program and this man-page are
maintained by Emmanuel Beffara <manu@beffara.org>.
The homepage for Rubber can be found at
http://www.pps.jussieu.fr/~beffara/soft/rubber/.

.SH SEE ALSO
The full documentation for
.B rubber
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B rubber
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info rubber
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
