.TH RUBBER 1
.SH NAME
rubber \- a building system for LaTeX documents
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rubber
.RI [ options ]
.I sources ...
.br
.B rubber\-pipe
.RI [ options ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Rubber is a wrapper for LaTeX and companion programs.
Its purpose is, given a LaTeX source to process, to compile it enough times to
resolve all references, possibly running satellite programs such as BibTeX,
makeindex, Metapost, etc. to produce appropriate data files.
.PP
The command
.B rubber
builds the specified documents completely.
The source files may be either LaTeX sources (in which case the suffix .tex may
be omitted) or documents in a format Rubber knows how to translate into LaTeX
(this currently means CWEB or Literate Haskell documents).
If one compilation fails, the whole process stops, including the compilation of
the next documents on the command line, and
.B rubber
returns a non-zero exit code.
.PP
The command
.B rubber\-pipe
does the same for one document but it reads the LaTeX source from standard
input and dumps the compiled document on standard output.
.P
Some information cannot be extracted from the LaTeX sources.
This is the case, for instance, with the search paths (which can be specified
in environment variables like TEXINPUTS), or the style to be used with
Makeindex.
To address this problem, one can add information for Rubber in the comments of
the LaTeX sources, see section
.BR DIRECTIVES .
.
.SH OPTIONS
The options are used either to choose the action to be performed or to
configure the building process.
They are mostly the same in
.B rubber
and
.BR rubber\-pipe .
Options are parsed using GNU Getopt conventions.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-bzip2
Compress the final document (in
.I bzip2
format).
This is equivalent to saying
.I \-o bzip2
after all other options.
.TP
.B \-\-cache
Use the experimental cache system.
This uses a file named
.I rubber.cache
in the current directory to store the results of parsing and dependency
analysis, so that subsequent compilations are faster.
.TP
.B \-\-clean
Remove all files produced by the compilation, instead
of building the document.
This option is present in \fBrubber\fR only.
It applies to the compilation as it would be done with the other options of the
command line, i.e. saying
"rubber \-\-clean foo"
will not delete foo.ps, while saying
"rubber \-\-ps \-\-clean foo"
will.
.TP
.BI \-c,\ \-\-command \ <command>
Execute the specified command (or directive)
.I before
parsing the input files.
See section
.B DIRECTIVES
for details.
.TP
.BI \-e,\ \-\-epilogue \ <command>
Execute the specified command (or directive)
.I after
parsing the input files.
See section
.B DIRECTIVES
for details.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
Force at least one compilation of the source.
This may be useful, for instance, if some unusual dependency was modified (e.g.
a package in a system directory).
This option is irrelevant in
.BR rubber\-pipe .
.TP
.B \-z, \-\-gzip
Compress the final document (in
.I gzip
format).
This is equivalent to saying
.I \-o gz
after all other options.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display the list of all available options and exit nicely.
.TP
.B \-\-inplace
Go to the directory of the source files before compiling, so that compilation
results are in the same place as their sources.
.TP
.BI \-\-into \ <directory>
Go to the specified directory before compiling, so that all files are produced
there and not in the current directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-jobname \ <name>
Specify a job name different from the base file name.
This changes the name of output files and only applies to the first target.
.TP
.B \-k, \-\-keep
This option is used in
.B rubber\-pipe
only.
With this option, the temporary files will not be removed after compiling the
document and dumping the results on standard output.
The temporary document is named rubtmpX.tex, where X is a number such that no
file of that name exists initially.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-landscape
Specify that the final document should use landscape orientation.
This is relevant only when using
.B dvips
or
.BR dvipdfm .
.TP
.BI \-n,\ \-\-maxerr \ <num>
Set the maximum number of displayed errors.
By default, up to 10 errors are reported, saying
.I \-n \-1
displays all errors.
.TP
.BI \-m,\ \-\-module \ <module> [: <args> ]
Use the specified module in addition to the document's packages.
Arguments can be passed to the package by adding them after a colon, they
correspond to the package options in LaTeX.
The module is loaded
.I before
parsing the document's sources.
.TP
.BI \-\-only \ <sources>
Compile the document partially, including only the specified sources.
This works by inserting a call to \\includeonly on the command line.
The argument is a comma-separated list of file names.
.TP
.BR \-o,\ \-\-post \ <module> [: <args> ]
Use the specified module as a post-processor.
This is similar to the
.I \-m
options except that the module is loaded
.I after
parsing the document.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-pdf
Produce PDF output.
When this option comes after
.I \-\-ps
(for instance in the form
.IR \-pd )
it is a synonym for
.IR \-o\ ps2pdf ,
otherwise it acts as
.IR \-m\ pdftex ,
in order to use pdfLaTeX instead of LaTeX.
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-ps
Process the DVI produced by the process through
.BR dvips (1)
to produce a PostScript document.
This option is a synonym for
.IR \-o\ dvips ,
it cannot come after
.IR \-\-pdf .
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Decrease the verbosity level.
This is the reverse of
.IR \-v .
.TP
.BI \-r,\ \-\-read \ <file>
Read additional directives from the specified file (see also the directive
"read").
.TP
.B \-S, \-\-src\-specials
Enable generation of source specials if the compiler supports it.
This is equivalent to setting the variable
.I src-specials
to
.IR yes .
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-short
Display LaTeX's error messages in a compact form (one error per line).
.TP
.BI \-I,\ \-\-texpath \ <directory>
Add the specified directory to TeX's search path.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Increase the verbosity level.
Levels between 0 and 4 exist, the default level is 1 for
.B rubber
and 0 for
.BR rubber\-pipe .
Beware, saying
.I \-vvv
makes Rubber speak a lot.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version number and exit nicely.
.TP
.BI \-W,\ \-\-warn \ <type>
Report information of the given type if there was no error during compilation.
The available types are:
.B boxes
(overfull and underfull boxes),
.B refs
(undefined or multiply defined references),
.B misc
(other warnings) and
.B all
to report all warnings.
.PP
.
.SH MODULES
Rubber's action is influenced by modules.
Modules take care of the particular features of packages and external programs.
.
.SS Packages
For every package that a document uses, Rubber looks for a module of the same
name to perform the tasks that this package my require apart from the
compilation by LaTeX.
Modules can be added to the ones provided by default to include new features
(this is the point of the module system).
The standard modules are the following:
.TP
.B beamer
This module handles Beamer's extra files the same way as other tables of
contents.
.TP
.B bibtex
Takes care of processing the document's bibliography with BibTeX when needed.
This module is automatically loaded if the document contains the macro
\\bibliography (see also in
.B DIRECTIVES
for options).
.TP
.B combine
The combine package is used to gather several LaTeX documents into a single
one, and this module handles the dependencies in this case.
.TP
.B epsfig
This modules handles graphics inclusion for the documents that use the old
style \\psfig macro.
It is actually an interface for the graphics module, see this one for details.
.TP
.B graphics, graphicx
These modules identify the graphics included in the document and consider them
as dependencies for compilation.
They also use standard rules to build these files with external programs.
See the info documentation for details.
.TP
.B hyperref
Handle the extra files that this package produces in some cases.
.TP
.B index, makeidx, nomencl
Process the document's indexes and nomenclatures with
.BR makeindex (1)
when needed (see section
.B DIRECTIVES
for options).
.TP
.B minitoc, minitoc-hyper
On cleaning, remove additional files that produced to make partial tables of
contents.
.TP
.B moreverb, verbatim
Adds the files included with \\verbatiminput and similar macros to the list of
dependencies.
.TP
.B multibib
Handles the extra bibliographies that this package creates, and removes the
extra files on cleaning.
.TP
.B natbib
May cause an extra compilation to solve references.
.TP
.B xr
Add additional .aux files used for external references to the list of
dependencies, so recompiling is automatic when referenced document are
changed.
.PP
.
.SS Pre-processing
The following modules are provided for using programs that generate a LaTeX
source from a different file format:
.TP
.B cweb
This module's purpose is to run
.BR cweave (1)
if needed before the compiling process to produce the LaTeX source.
This module is automatically loaded if the file specified on the command line
has
.B .w
as its suffix.
.TP
.B lhs2TeX
This module uses the
.B lhs2TeX
preprocessor to generate the LaTeX source from a Literate Haskell program.
It is automatically triggered if the input file's name ends with
.BR .lhs .
.PP
.
.SS Post-processing
The following modules are provided to support different kinds of
post-processings.
Note that the order matters when using these modules: if you want to use a
processing chain like
.RS
foo.tex \-> foo.dvi \-> foo.ps \-> foo.pdf \-> foo.pdf.gz
.RE
you have to load the modules
.BR dvips ,
.B ps2pdf
and
.B gz
in that order, for instance using the command line
.RS
rubber \-p \-o ps2pdf \-z foo.tex
.RE
.TP
.B bzip2
Produce a version of the final file compressed with
.BR bzip2 (1).
.TP
.B dvipdfm
Runs
.BR dvipdfm (1)
at the end of compilation to produce a PDF document.
.TP
.B dvips
Runs
.BR dvips (1)
at the end of compilation to produce a PostScript document.
This module is also loaded by the command line option
.IR \-\-ps .
.TP
.B expand
Produce an expanded LaTeX source by replacing \\input macros by included
files, bibliography macros by the bibliography produced by
.BR bibtex (1),
and local classes and packages by their source.
If the main file is
.I foo.tex
then then expanded file will be named
.IR foo\-final.tex .
See the info documentation for details.
.TP
.B gz
Produce a version of the final file compressed with
.BR gzip (1).
.TP
.B ps2pdf
Assuming that the compilation produces a PostScript document (for instance
using module
.BR dvips ),
convert this document to PDF using
.BR ps2pdf (1).
.PP
.
.SS Compiler choice
The following modules are used to change the LaTeX compiler:
.TP
.B aleph
Use the Aleph compiler instead of TeX, i.e. compiles the document using
.BR lamed (1)
instead of
.BR latex .
.TP
.B etex
Instructs Rubber to use
.BR elatex (1)
instead of
.BR latex .
.TP
.B omega
Use the Omega compiler instead of TeX, i.e. compiles the document using
.BR lambda (1)
instead of
.BR latex .
If the module
.B dvips
is used too, it will use
.BR odvips (1)
to translate the DVI file.
Note that this module is triggered automatically when the document uses the
package
.BR omega .
.TP
.B pdftex
Instructs Rubber to use
.BR pdflatex (1)
instead of
.BR latex (1)
to compile the document. By default, this produces a PDF file instead of a
DVI, but when loading the module with the option
.B dvi
(for instance by saying
.IR \-m\ pdftex:dvi )
the document is compiled into DVI using
.BR pdflatex .
This module is also loaded by the command line option
.IR \-\-pdf .
.TP
.B vtex
Instructs Rubber to use the VTeX compiler.
By default this uses
.B vlatex
as the compiler to produce PDF output.
With the option
.B ps
(e.g. when saying "rubber \-m vtex:ps foo.tex") the compiler used is
.B vlatexp
and the result is a PostScript file.
.PP
.
.SH DIRECTIVES
The automatic behavior of Rubber is based on searching for macros in the LaTeX
sources.
When this is not enough, directives can be added in the comments of the
sources.
A directive is a line like
.RS
% rubber: cmd args
.RE
The line must begin with a "%", then any sequence of "%" signs and
spaces, then the text "rubber:" followed by spaces and a command name,
possibly followed by spaces and arguments.
.
.SS General directives
.TP
.BI alias \ <name1>\ <name2>
Pretend that the LaTeX macro
.I name1
is equivalent to
.IR name2 .
This can be useful when defining wrappers around supported macros.
.TP
.BI clean \ <file>
Indicates that the specified file should be removed when cleaning using
.IR \-\-clean .
.TP
.BI depend \ <file>
Consider the specified file as a dependency, so that its modification time
will be checked.
.TP
.BI make \ <file> \ [ <options> ]
Declare that the specified file has to be generated.
Options can specify the way it should be produced, the available options are
.BI from \ <file>
to specify the source and
.BI with \ <rule>
to specify the conversion rule.
For instance, saying "make foo.pdf from foo.eps" indicates that
.I foo.pdf
should be produced from
.IR foo.eps ,
with any conversion rule that can do it.
See the info documentation for details on file conversion.
.TP
.BI module \ <module> \ [ <options> ]
Loads the specified module, possibly with options.
This is equivalent to the command-line option
.IR \-\-module .
.TP
.BI onchange \ <file>\ <command>
Execute the specified shell command after compiling if the contents of the
specified file have changed.
The file name ends at the first space.
.TP
.BI paper \ <options>
Specify options related to paper size.
Currently they are used to give
.I \-t
options to
.B dvips
and
.I \-p
options to
.BR dvipdfm .
.TP
.BI path \ <directory>
Adds the specified directory to the search path for TeX (and Rubber).
The name of the directory is everything that follows the spaces after "path".
.TP
.BI read \ <file>
Read the specified file of directives.
The file must contain one directive per line.
Empty lines and lines that begin with "%" are ignored.
.TP
.BI rules \ <file>
Read extra conversion rules from the specified file.
The format of this file is the same as that of
.IR rules.ini ,
see the info documentation for details.
.TP
.BI set \ <name>\ <value>
Set the value of a variable.
For details on the existing variables and their meaning, see the info
documentataion.
.TP
.BI watch \ <file>
Watch the specified file for changes.
If the contents of this file has changed after a compilation, then another
compilation is triggered.
This is useful in the case of tables of contents, for instance.
.PP
.
.SS Module-specific directives
If a command has the form
.IR foo.bar ,
it is considered a command
.I bar
for the module
.IR foo .
If this module is not registered when the directive is found, then the command
is silently ignored.
For the standard modules, the directives are the following:
.TP
.BI bibtex.crossrefs \ <number>
Set the minimum number of
.I crossref
required for automatic inclusion of the referenced entry in the citation list.
This sets the option
.I -min-crossrefs
when calling
.BR bibtex (1).
.TP
.BI bibtex.path \ <directory>
Adds the specified directory to the search path for BibTeX databases (.bib
files).
.TP
.BI bibtex.sorted \ <boolean>
If the argument is
.IR true ,
.I yes
or
.IR 1 ,
declare that the bibliography is sorted (this is the default), otherwise
declare that the citations appear in the same order as in the text.
This may require additional calls to
.BR bibtex .
.TP
.BI bibtex.stylepath \ <directory>
Adds the specified directory to the search path for BibTeX styles (.bst
files).
.TP
.BI dvipdfm.options \ <options>
Pass the specified command-line switches to
.BR dvipdfm .
.TP
.BI dvips.options \ <options>
Pass the specified command-line switches to
.BR dvips .
.TP
.BI index.tool \ (index)\ <name>
Specifies which tool is to be used to process the index.
The currently supported tools are
.BR makeindex (1)
(the default choice) and
.BR xindy (1).
The argument
.I index
is optional, it may be used to specify the list of indexes the command applies
to.
When present, it must be enclosed in parentheses; the list is comma-separated.
When the argument is not present, the command applies to all indices.
.TP
.BI index.language \ (index)\ <language>
Selects the language used for sorting the index.
This only applies when using
.BR xindy (1)
as the indexing tool.
The optional argument has the same semantics as above.
.TP
.BI index.modules \ (index)\ <module>...
Specify which modules to use when processing an index with
.BR xindy (1).
The optional argument has the same semantics as above.
.TP
.BI index.order \ (index)\ <options>
Modifies the sorting options for the indexes.
The arguments are words (separated by spaces) among
.IR standard ,
.I german
and
.IR letter .
This only applies when using
.BR makeindex (1).
The optional argument has the same semantics as above.
.TP
.BI index.path \ (index)\ <directory>
Adds the specified directory to the search path for index styles (.ist files).
The optional argument has the same semantics as above.
.TP
.BI index.style \ (index)\ <style>
Specifies the index style to be used.
The optional argument has the same semantics as above.
.TP
.B makeidx.language, .modules, .order, .path, .style, .tool
These directives are the same as for the
.B index
module, except that they don't accept the optional argument.
.TP
.B multibib.crossrefs, .path, .sorted, .stylepath
These directives are the same as for the
.B bibtex
module but they apply to bibliographies managed by the
.B multibib
package.
They take an optional first argument, with the same convention as for the
directives of the
.B index
module, which may be used to specify the list of bibliographies the command
applies to.
.PP
.
.SH BUGS
There are surely a some...
.PP
This page documents Rubber version 1.1.
The program and this man-page are maintained by Emmanuel Beffara
<manu@beffara.org>.
The homepage for Rubber can be found at
http://www.pps.jussieu.fr/~beffara/soft/rubber/.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
The full documentation for
.B rubber
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B rubber
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info rubber
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
